Add detailed offer decline codes (#370)
ethereum/portal-network-specs: portal-wire-protocol.md

```
selector     = 0x07

> accept       = Container(connection_id: Bytes2, content_keys: ByteList[limit=64])

Reviewer: nit: we usually use `limit=` for `List` only, meaning this would be: `ByteList[64]`.

```

- `connection_id`: Connection ID to set up a uTP stream to transmit the requested data.
    - ConnectionID values **SHOULD** be randomly generated.
- `content_keys`: Signals which content keys are desired.
    - A byte-list corresponding to the offered keys with the byte in the positions of the desired keys set to `1`.
      - 0: Generic decline, catch all if their is no specified case

>       - 1: Accept the Content

Reviewer 2: Minor remark, but I would be in favor of putting the accept on the 0, so that all declines come after that in order.

Reviewer 2: Another remark would be if the generic decline is needed?

Author: > Minor remark, but I would be in favor of putting the accept on the 0, so that all declines come after that in order.

Awesome I wanted to do that like posix error's but I didn't know if team's were ok with initializing the bitlist with 1's or not

> Another remark would be if the generic decline is needed?

There are possibly cases I didn't think of and we could in the future update the spec to handle them, I thought it was a good catch all, as posix/linux uses 1 for a catch all. I am not too picky though so if you really want to remove it I am cool with that just let me know

Reviewer 2: > There are possibly cases I didn't think of and we could in the future update the spec to handle them, I thought it was a good catch all, as posix/linux uses 1 for a catch all. I am not too picky though so if you really want to remove it I am cool with that just let me know

I'm fine with keeping the generic case also. I just mentioned it as I looked in fluffy code and in our case we have no condition to use it currently.

Author: We don't use it as well. My thinking was if there wasn't any specific errors for a client they would use it, then we could ask them why they are using a generic code and go from there

      - 2: Declined, already store content
      - 3: Declined, inbound content transfer already in progress

>       - 4: Declined, due to rate limited

Reviewer 3: Isn't `inbound content transfer already in progress` effectively the same or a subset of 'due to rate limited'? So perhaps we don't need both.

Reviewer 2: Inbound means also inbound from another node, so I am not sure if this is a subset, seems like two different conditions really.

Reviewer 3: > Inbound means also inbound from another node, so I am not sure if this is a subset, seems like two different conditions really.

But we wouldn't want to block a transfer in that case because the transfer from the other node might fail validation after being received. If I remember correctly, declining in this case could possibly be used as a DOS.

Author: > Isn't `inbound content transfer already in progress` effectively the same or a subset of `due to rate limited`? So perhaps we don't need both.

These are 2 distinct cases.

One is a rate limit of overall uTP connections, the other is a rate limit of how many uTP transfer do you accept concurrently for any one piece of content.

If you have ideas for how to make this clearer I am all for it.

Reviewer: I think client can be flexible on this regard and decide how it wants to handle this. For example, if 10 peers offer content at the same time, it can:

- accept all of them (most trivial, but less optimal solution)

or

- accept only few of them and decline others

or

- it can accept only one, and decline others (but remember peers that offered it)
  - if the accepted one fails, it can go to peers that offered it and ask them for the content

Reviewer 3: In that case I think just the wording should be updated to be more clear that the content limit doesn't restrict to only allowing one in progress transfer so perhaps something like this:
```
      - 3: Declined, inbound content transfer limit reached
```

Author: I was still really confused with this one so I choose `the total inbound rate limit for accepting this specific content_id has been reached` let me know what you think

Reviewer 3: > I was still really confused with this one so I choose `the total inbound rate limit for accepting this specific content_id has been reached` let me know what you think

This is clear to me. Looks good.

Reviewer 4: This feels like it might be getting into the realm of over specified.  In general, I think this decline should be kept generic and intended for "general rate limiting" category declines.  The goal is to allow signaling that this is being declined because "some kind of capacity has been reached" which might be a low level thing relating to the overall number of packets this node is processing or it might be specific, related to this specific content-id.  I don't think we need to be granular on this, as the one receiving this decline should still have enough information to proceed.  This kind of response is almost the same as a generic decline, as it gives very little information and it probably isn't totally clear how the offering node should respond, other than to leave the node alone and not hammer them with more requests in the immediate future.

Author: Could you post what you think the updated description should be? I think we should definitely have 2 distinct rate limit decline codes
As these are 2 very distinct cases, if a application using this code treats it the same as another I think that is fine, but it is very useful if someone is trying to understand why a piece of content is being declined which is the main focus behind this PR.

If we only had 1 rate limit code that would make the decline code not useful to someone trying to understand why it is being declined which, I understand why some higher level application would likely not treat the 2 code differently, but I think it is fine if a bridge treats them the same, as with the extra code it makes it a lot easier to understand why the bridge isn't working or has a low success rate, which is the goal to better understand our network. Maybe build a grafana graph as well.

Reviewer 4: ```
      - 3: Declined, inbound content transfer already in progress
      - 4: Declined, due to rate limited
 ```
 
 Sorry to confuse the issue.  I believe that these are both useful and should both be kept in the spec.  I'm a little dubious that we'll end up using `#4` because I think that this type of declining for a node that is limiting packets due to rate limiting will happen at a lower level, but I think it's fine to leave it in the spec.
 
 My initial response was because I was mis-reading the conversation, thinking that we were discussing adding another error opcode on top of these two.  Disregard.  I like the set of decline opcodes that are currently in the spec.

Author: ```
      - 0: Accept the content
      - 1: Generic decline, catch all if their is no specified case
      - 2: Declined, content already stored
      - 3: Declined, content not within node's radius
      - 4: Declined, total concurrent uTP transfer limit reached
      - 5: Declined, the total inbound rate limit for accepting this specific content_id has been reached
      - 6 to 255: Unspecified decline, this shouldn't be used, but if it is received should just be treated the same as any other decline
```

This is the current list, let me know if you think there are any issues @pipermerriam (just posting it here just to confirm we are on the same page)

Reviewer 5: The overall structure of the PR makes sense to me but I agree with @pipermerriam on the specific reason codes (specifically #5) being overspecified.  Unless I'm missing some context, that feels like maybe an application specific reason code whereas a "rate limited" code like @pipermerriam proposed makes more sense at a spec level.  Clients could have all kinds of internal rate limits and we aren't providing one for each category of rate limiting (e.g. concurrent uTP transfers, overall inbound bandwidth limits, overall internal max packet processing limits reached, etc.) and #5 feels like it's tuned to some specific scenario that one implementation is following for how to acquire content (i.e. accept offers for the same content ID from everyone who offers it within a certain time window) whereas other implementations might reasonably decline all offers for a specific `content_id` if they already have a single stream in flight and have no reason to provide reason #5 or #4 since neither really applies.

Author: 5 is important become it is a rate limit specially made to prevent a thundering herd dos vector on the node. Here Milos lays out 3 possible ways a prevention mechanism could be implemented https://github.com/ethereum/portal-network-specs/pull/370#discussion_r1995703136 . 

`#5` is for any rate limit on a specific piece of content, which is quite distinguished from other rate limit reasons. I would argue that there are a quite limited reasons to decline a piece of content in terms of rate limiting. `overall inbound bandwidth limits, overall internal max packet processing limits reached` these 2 examples I would argue they are the same reason and would use `#4`.

Every Portal implementation will use decline code number `#5` as it is required to not be instantly dos'ed when any new piece of content is input into the network, or be dos'ed by neighbourhood gossip. I heavily recommend the team to read this issue on the problem https://github.com/ethereum/portal-network-specs/issues/242

> i.e. accept offers for the same content ID from everyone who offers it within a certain time window) whereas other implementations might reasonably decline all offers for a specific content_id if they already have a single stream in flight and have no reason to provide reason 5

Both of the scenarios you gave here would use decline code `#5` and are outlined by Milos here  https://github.com/ethereum/portal-network-specs/pull/370#discussion_r1995703136 on how clients could prevent the thunder herd dos vector. The rate limit could be a time window, or some arbitrary count for how many streams you accept for a single time. But the point of this code is to say it is declined to prevent this dos vector, which every Portal client faces.

If you want we can change the wording of number #4 to make it more generic again like `connections rate limited`, or we can add another decline code, but 4# and 5# are used for completely different reasons. I would rather more decline codes then less so we can actually try and understand what is going on. If we only had 1 rate limit decline code and there are 2 different reasons for it to be declined from my point of view as someone trying to debug my bridge it is a coin flip, where if I have this extra information it is much easier for me to fix a problem in my bridge or identify a bug in a client.

`#4` is used for a rate limit like you can't handle accept more connections or your node would blow up
`#5` is we don't want to accept more of X content_id to protect against a thunderherd attack and accepting the same content_id for all your connection spots which would be quite unsmart of a client to due as it is wasting resources.

I will update the description

Author: ```
      - 0: Accept the content
      - 1: Generic decline, catch all if their is no specified case
      - 2: Declined, content already stored
      - 3: Declined, content not within node's radius
      - 4: Declined, rate limit reached. Node can't handle anymore connections.
      - 5: Declined, inbound rate limit for accepting this specific content_id, used to protect against thundering herds
      - 6 to 255: Unspecified decline, this shouldn't be used, but if it is received should just be treated the same as any other decline
```

Here is an update description which should hopefully make the 2 different decline codes more clear on how they would be used, I think my previous iteration was quite confusing. If anybody has any suggestions on how we could make these clearer let me know.

Reviewer 5: I get the thundering heard "attack" vector, but the more I've thought about this, maybe I'm missing the bigger issue this whole PR is trying to solve for.  

Is this just to help bridges do better bridging and if so, should be we be updating the core network spec for the benefit of bridges?  I guess I don't see what benefit generic nodes are going to get from this level of detail.

Author: This benefits anybody trying to understand why a decline is happening, which from someone calling `offer` the reason might as well be random. The reasoning for this PR has been written in the PR's description and throughout it.

The Accept message can take 1165 bytes, and we only use 8 bytes or 64 bits for information on what to accept or decline. Currently it is really hard to understand why a piece of content is declined, and there is no real way to get this information other then controlling 100% of the nodes on the network. For all I know the other nodes are buggy, but I have no clue as all I was told is `declined`. Understanding how our network behaves is important for monitoring the health of the network and making sure any apps using `offer` is performing properly.

Also Felix from geth suggested this change after I brought up the issues we are facing deploying the state network during the Portal Summit. He said they do a similar thing on devp2p

> I guess I don't see what benefit generic nodes are going to get from this level of detail.
I don't think this is a blocker of the PR. Inputting content into the network is a pretty critical function, and currently we have no clue or insights in why it fails.

Reviewer 5: If nodes are possibly buggy, wouldn't it make more sense to write hive tests that explicitly test the various decline scenarios and then run all the clients against them rather than add extra bytes for to a message that is functionally for debug/troubleshooting purposes and serve no explicit network function other than metrics?  Just because "we" (whoever that is) don't know exactly why some nodes decline content doesn't seem like a reason that we need to implement a breaking change and require all clients to implement what appears to be effectively debug messages. If everybody else supports the change, that's fine and I'll rest my case but seems like there are better ways to approach the issues cited above about identifying root causes for declined content offers.

Reviewer 5: I'm just struggling to see what use case an OFFERing node will do with the data received in this proposed change. If it's for monitoring network health and understanding why content is declined, seems like it makes more sense to just a run a few of each type of client and monitor debug logs.  Ultralight provides most of these details already and it would be easy to introduce additional details in logging rather than adding to network traffic.

Author: Currently we don't even offer content to Ultralight because we have a success rate of almost 0% against them. Every block has 4000 key value pairs of state I need to gossip and the success rate currently is 50-90%. We need a success rate of 99.9999% to go live. The only way for me to remotely tell why the offers are being declined is to basically controller 100% of the network.

I don't want to spend time debugging why clients are declining when they can just tell me why. And I don't think it is smart to guess why.

> easy to introduce additional details in logging rather than adding to network traffic.

It isn't easy for me to read 5 different implementations, understand all of their implementation details then ask everybody for access to their nodes so I can understand why they are declining my offers. `makes more sense to just a run a few of each type of client and monitor debug logs` this doesn't make much sense because a node can decline for 6 different reasons, it is unreasonable for any individual to micro manage client teams. Furthermore if a node is declining for silly reasons we want to write a bridge which won't offer to it, maybe there is a bug in the bridge.

There isn't really a downside for a node to give a reason for why it is declining content. These comments mostly seem like bike shedding. Offer/Accept is primarily used for Bridging. 

The main point here is a client can decline for any reason, and someone sending an offer has no idea why without controlling the whole network and having a deep understanding of every implementation.

> no explicit network function

Offer/Accept is the only way content gets into the network, understanding why a node is declining is extremely helpful for such a critical function of the node. Bridging is one of the most important parts of the protocol, without it there is no content on the networks at all.

Author: > rather than adding to network traffic

this change doesn't add to network traffic we aren't sending any additional packets, in 99.9% of cases we are sending 7 extra bits compared to what we are doing now. Sending 64 pieces of content isn't even possible on the history network or state network the max would be ~36. So worse case this adds an additional 28 bytes to the accept packet which is practically empty. So again this seems like bike shedding.

Author: > seems like there are better ways to approach the issues cited above about identifying root causes for declined content offers

I hope I made it clear above how, this is the best way to identify the root causes for declined offers. There is no better source then the source.

Reviewer 5: You've made a very compelling case for how this serves bridges, which goes back to my original question.  

>Is this just to help bridges do better bridging and if so, should be we be updating the core network spec for the benefit of bridges? I guess I don't see what benefit generic nodes are going to get from this level of detail.

> There isn't really a downside for a node to give a reason for why it is declining content. These comments mostly seem like bike shedding. Offer/Accept is primarily used for Bridging.

This is where we fundamentally see things differently.  The original design principles for the Portal Network laid out at the start say that [bridges aren't privileged in the network](https://github.com/ethereum/portal-network-specs?tab=readme-ov-file#bridge-nodes).  If we're going that route, that's fine but let's be clear about what we're doing.

If OFFER/ACCEPT is primarily a path for bridge nodes to get content into the network, then all of the above detailed reason codes make sense.  But, from how I've understood the usage of OFFER/ACCEPT, it's for how peers distribute content around the network.  In that use case, I as a node runner don't care whether a node declines because of I'm part of the thundering herd versus I'm being rate limited because the ACCEPTing node already has too many uTP connections open.  And, I should generally already know if the content I'm offering is outside a node's radius (unless they've changed it since the last time we exchanged pings so shouldn't be offering it.  

>If everybody else supports the change, that's fine 

I'm not arguing that this is a flawed proposal but it's adding something to the wire spec that appears to be at variance with the core design principles. I'd like to have this agreed that we're moving towards a bridge centric model for content distribution if that's how we as the whole group of implementers want to move.

Author: This change doesn't make `bridges` more privileged, it just provides more context why something is decline, which to my understanding the only points made against this PR is
- this PR is a breaking change

I don't think this PR being a breaking change is a reason not to do it.

- nodes won't treat the decline codes differently

I think it is fine if they don't threat it differently, it will help us understand the health of the network regardless no? If a node doesn't care what the decline code is that is fine, it will help the person running the Portal node understand how their node is performing. I would argue a good `OFFER/ACCEPT, it's for how peers distribute content around the network` Portal implementation would  use this additional context in deciding who they want to do neighborhood gossip with.

>  as a node runner don't care whether a node declines because of I'm part of the thundering herd versus I'm being rate limited because the ACCEPTing node already has too many uTP connections open.

As a node runner you don't care about anything other then the JSON-RPC working.

A node would care about the difference if a node gets the ` I'm part of the thundering herd versus I'm being rate limited` your node could prioritize other nodes on the network which are getting less offers for new content_id's. Maybe a node wouldn't waste bandwidth sending an offer and use their limited bandwidth more effectively, then just blindly sending an offer to everyone they know which is an actual waste of bandwidth.

`node already has too many uTP connections open` if a node gets this decline code it would make sense to prioritize other nodes as well.

> I'm not arguing that this is a flawed proposal but it's adding something to the wire spec that appears to be at variance with the core design principles. I'd like to have this agreed that we're moving towards a bridge centric model for content distribution if that's how we as the whole group of implementers want to move.

I don't think this PR  is making the portal-network into a more `bridge centric model`. It is simply providing more context.   You can write more intelligent software with more context. The model of Portal has never changed and it isn't changing now. 

This PR doesn't change any `core design principles`, why can't someone write a better Portal client with more context, it doesn't need to be a bridge. But it is silly to say bridges aren't doing most of the work.

> This is where we fundamentally see things differently. The original design principles for the Portal Network laid out at the start say that [bridges aren't privileged in the network](https://github.com/ethereum/portal-network-specs?tab=readme-ov-file#bridge-nodes). If we're going that route, that's fine but let's be clear about what we're doing.

This PR doesn't make bridges privileged, and this is bike shedding. This PR doesn't change a bridge at all. Is more context helpful for a bridge? Yes. Is that a bad thing? No. More context can be used to improve neighborhood gossip, or any application using Offer/Accept. A naive implementation is a naive implementation, with context you can build better implementations whether that is a Portal Client or a Bridge.

So I will ask how is this PR making `bridges privileged`? And if the answer to this question is `it isn't making bridges privileged`, I don't see a reason to block this PR.

Reviewer 5: It's not bikeshedding to question why we are making a breaking change to the wire spec if the advantages cited are 
> it will help us understand the health of the network regardless 
metrics
>I don't want to spend time debugging why clients are declining when they can just tell me why
debugging
> Bridging is one of the most important parts of the protocol, without it there is no content on the networks at all.
better bridges

None of which are part of the current wire spec.

Regardless.

> I would argue a good OFFER/ACCEPT, it's for how peers distribute content around the network Portal implementation would use this additional context in deciding who they want to do neighborhood gossip with.

>A node would care about the difference if a node gets the  I'm part of the thundering herd versus I'm being rate limited your node could prioritize other nodes on the network which are getting less offers for new content_id's. Maybe a node wouldn't waste bandwidth sending an offer and use their limited bandwidth more effectively, then just blindly sending an offer to everyone they know which is an actual waste of bandwidth.

>node already has too many uTP connections open if a node gets this decline code it would make sense to prioritize other nodes as well.

This is what I was asking for.  These are helpful considerations applicable to the [Neighborhood Gossip](https://github.com/ethereum/portal-network-specs/blob/master/portal-wire-protocol.md) section of the wire protocol.  Would you be open to inclusion of some language in that section as part of this PR?  Maybe something like:
```
Nodes SHOULD use the ACCEPT response codes for declined content to inform their process for identifying peers to OFFER content to.  Some examples include:
- Keep track of nodes who decline content as "not interesting" that falls within their advertised radius and exclude them from future offers
- Keep track of nodes who decline content due to rate limiting and set an increasing backoff timeout before OFFERing content to them again
```
Happy to think further on this and offer additional input if you find it useful.

Author: > This is where we fundamentally see things differently. The original design principles for the Portal Network laid out at the start say that [bridges aren't privileged in the network](https://github.com/ethereum/portal-network-specs?tab=readme-ov-file#bridge-nodes). If we're going that route, that's fine but let's be clear about what we're doing.

> None of which are part of the current wire spec.

This PR doesn't make bridges privileged. I don't understand why the use cases of the `portal-wire-spec` not being listed is a reason to not make the `portal-wire-spec` more useful. Other networks and applications directly/indirectly use the `portal-wire-spec`, so I don't see why we wouldn't make changes to the `portal-wire-spec` just because a usecase isn't listed in the spec itself. The current spec has nothing about `thunder herd attacks`, but any competent implementation has mitigation's in place to not be dos'ed by new content being pushed onto the network.

 > This is what I was asking for. These are helpful considerations applicable to the [Neighborhood Gossip](https://github.com/ethereum/portal-network-specs/blob/master/portal-wire-protocol.md) section of the wire protocol. Would you be open to inclusion of some language in that section as part of this PR? Maybe something like:
 
 I am fine saying Decline codes can be useful for X, but I wouldn't want to over specify suggestions for implementation details. We don't even include suggestions for how to deal with thunder herd attacks or mention it in the specs as a problem as I listed above.
 
 I am fine adding a line like
 ```
The node can use ACCEPT codes received in past responses to make more efficient choices on which neighbors to gossip to.
```

How an implementation uses this information is up to them as it is an implementation detail.

>       - 1: Accept the Content
>       - 2: Declined, already store content
>       - 3: Declined, inbound content transfer already in progress
>       - 4: Declined, due to rate limited
>       - 5: Declined, content not within nodes radius

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - 1: Accept the content
      - 2: Declined, content already stored
      - 3: Declined, content not within node's radius
      - 4: Declined, due to rate limited
      - 5: Declined, inbound content transfer already in progress
```

nit: While it doesn't really matter, I would move "content not within radius" higher in the list. Also slight wording changes.

>       - 6 to 256: Unspecified decline, this shouldn't be used, but if it is received should just be treated the same as any other decline

Reviewer 3: Great, this is more clear. But to be precise it should be `6 to 255`.

>       - 6..=256: Unspecified decline, this shouldn't be used, but if it is received should just be treated the same as any other decline

Reviewer 3: Why do we need `Unspecified decline`? I think `Generic decline` covers that case.

Reviewer 3: Oh I miss understood the syntax there. It's how to handle the other values 6 to 255. I'd suggest updating the syntax to make it more clear. Not sure if that is Rust specific range syntax.

Author: Could you make a suggestion on the PR of how you think we could improve it using this button 
<img width="30" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/32ba7a81-38f5-40fa-8bac-a10cfdfa65b3" />
